1
Samsung’s upcoming Galaxy smartphones are very exciting. The company’s 10th anniversary Galaxy S10 has triple rear cameras, an ’ultrasonic’ in-display reader, new gradient color schemes and a 5G option while it will also launch a smartphone which bends. Unfortunately, however, all Samsung’s new phones have now been overshadowed by the company’s polarising new decision… 

‘Great Secret Features’ and ‘Nasty Surprises’ are my regular columns investigating the best features / biggest problems hidden behind the headlines.
Picked up by The Verge, Samsung has announced it will put display notches in its next Galaxy smartphones. Speaking at the company’s San Francisco Developer Conference this week, Samsung product marketing director Hassan Anjum unveiled multiple notch display types as a method to reduce bezel size “even further”. These are:


Infinity-U: a half oval notch similar to the Essential phone
Infinity-V: a straight-sided version of the Infinity U
Infinity-O: a bizarre circular notch positioned on the left side of the phone, similar to the bizarre Asus ZenFone 6.
Most interesting, however, was the ‘New Infinity’ a seemingly notch-less display. Unfortunately, Anjum chose not to discuss this on stage but teased that all these displays are “are just around the corner, and I can’t wait to tell you more about them.”

How Samsung would integrate the New Infinity into a phone, in particular, remains to be seen. Chinese rivals Vivo, Lenovo and Xiaomi have already used pop-up front cameras and slider mechanisms to deliver notch-less, bezel-less smartphones to market but previous leaks suggest Samsung is working on a more ambitious solution.

That said, what we now know for certain is - for better or worse - Samsung phones will finally embrace the notch.

This is something of a surprise. Samsung had long been praised for resisting this polarising design trend, so the U-turn is going to frustrate a lot of the company’s fans. The move also makes its recent social media boasts look a little hollow.

This isn’t the end of the controversy either. In its battle to trim bezels, we already know Samsung will scrap its rival Face ID technology and even the headphone jack is no longer safe. Will the end justify all these means? Maybe.